A graph is a data structure that consists of a set of nodes and a set of edges that connect the nodes together

- `Graph G = (V, E):
	- set of nodes V (alt: points, vertices)
	- •set of edges E (alt: arcs, connections, links)


#### Adjacency matrix:
- includes nodes that connect, binary matrix.

#### Depth first Search
1. Mark s as visited
2. For all unmarked vertices v adjacent to s
	- Recursively use DFS to visit all vertices v

#### Breadth first Search
1. Put s onto a FIFO queue. Repeat until the queue is empty:
2. remove the least recently added vertex v
3. add each of v's unvisited neighbors to the queue, and mark them as visited.


#### Spanning Tree
- draw a tree over the graph that includes all the nodes in the graph
	- if the graph is weighted and connected
- •Spanning trees always have N-1 edges, where N is the number of nodes in the graph 

###### Prim’s Algorithm
- Start from an arbitrary node
- and choose the edge with the least weight to jump to the next node
- `O(N^2)`` time complexity

###### Kruskal’s Algorithm
- Given a weighted undirected graph:
	- sort the edges according to their weights.
	- keep selecting edges with smallest weights that do not form a cycle
		- until N-1 edges are selected for the MST.
- Requirements
	- Sorting is needed!
	- Sorting is the most expensive operation, so time complexity is O(E log E) where E is the number of edges in the graph
	- We need to detect cycles

### Dense vs. sparse graphs
Dense – a graph with many connections between nodes `(E=E(N^2))
	- use Adjacency matrix
Sparse – a graph with only a few connections between nodes `(E=O(N^2))
	- use Adjacency list

### Alternative graph representations
- Object Model - Links between objects
	- advantage: quick neighbour finding
	- disadvantage: maintaining the redundant structures
- Set Based - Sets of Nodes and Edges
	- Good for mathematical reasoning
	- Can be specific about what a graph is
	- Does not specify how a graph is stored, only the structure of a graph


### Paths and Cycles
- Path: sequence of vertices
- Cycle: closed path

##### Directed Acyclic Graphs
- A directed, acyclic graph (DAG) is a graph that contains no directed cycles.
- useful e.g. in modelling project dependencies

##### Complete Graphs
- In a complete graph, every vertex is adjacent to every other vertex.

### Connectivity
- A graph is connected if there is a path between each pair of vertices
- A graph is disconnected otherwise.

Every disconnected graph can be split up into a number of connected sub-graphs, called components.

- A graph Strongly connected if it's a connected directed graph
- strongly connected component is a (full) sub-graph in which there are directed paths between any two vertices, each way


### Bipartite graph
- In a bipartite graph: two different types of vertex
	- v1, v2
- every edge (i,j) that exists has (i in V1 )and (j in V2).

#### Isomorphism
- the same graph can be drawn in different ways.
- Two graphs my look similar but represent different graphs.
- Similarity of two graphs: *isomorphism*
- two graphs are isomorphic to each other, if can be obtained by relabelling

Two isomorphic graphs must have:
- the same number of nodes and edges,
- the same degree sequence.

•Two graphs cannot be isomorphic if one of them contains a sub-graph that the other does not.


### Shortest Path
- The path between two vertices with the lowest cost is called the shortest path

1. Repeat until target found or queue empty
2. Add the unvisited neighbours of the head of the queue to the back of the queue
3. Remove the head of the queue

```
G = (V,E)
p[a] holds the predecessor of a, initially NIL
current is a queue

PROCEDURE SHORTEST n m
p[n] = n
add n to current
While current is not empty
   remove the head of current, x
   for each neighbour of x, y
      if p[y]== NIL
         p[y] = x
         if y == m then return SUCCESS
      add y to current
return FAIL

In the SUCCESS case, the path can be found in p[], going backwards from m.
```



### Dijkstra is overrated

##### Priority queue
- is what is fucking sounds like
- probably heap allocated

##### Shit-ass Algorithm  
1. for each node, maintain the following information:
	- the predecessor node - all predecessor info together gives us a tree of shortest paths found so far; `NIL` initially
	- the (so far found) cost of reaching that node; initially 0
	- a boolean flag whether the cheapest path has been found

> has time complexity `O(E + N log N)`

```
[m] holds the predecessor of m, initially NIL
cheapest(m) marks if this forms part of the cheapest path (initially false for all nodes)

Add the start node, x, to the PQ. cost(x) = 0
Repeat until PQ is empty
	Remove the node with greatest priority from the PQ, call it n
	set cheapest[n] to true
	for every neighbour m of n, with m-n edge costing cm, if cheapest[m]==false:
	
		if p[m]!=NIL and cost[m]<=cost[n]+cm continue inner loop
		else set: p[m]=n, cost[m]=cost[n]+cm; add/update m in PQ
for known target node y, stop after second bullet point if n==y with SUCCESS;
report after loop FAILURE
```


