- Unauthorised access to computer material.
- Unauthorised access to computer material with intent to commit or facilitate commission of further offences .
- Unauthorised acts with intent to impair operation of computer.

### Software Misuse and Cyber Crime 

- Intellectual property 
- Fraud: tampering with data integrity 
- Criminal liability 
- Deception 
- Online harassment: cyber bullying 
- Cyberterrorism: propaganda 
- Illegal online markets

### Patents

- A patent may be understood as a monopoly over the commercial exploitation of an invention, granted for a limited time
- Rewarding the inventor
- Incentive function
- Public benefits rationale

Patents Act 1977 - Patentable inventions 
- The invention is new (novelty); 
- It involves an inventive step; 
- It is capable of industrial application.

A computer-implemented invention is one which involved the use of a computer, computer network or other programmable apparatus, where one or more features are realized wholly or partly by means of a computer program


### Data Protection

**Data Protection Act - 1998**
- Regulates the “processing” of personal data.
- Protects the rights of individuals whom the data is about (data subjects), mainly by placing duties on those who decide how and why such data is processed (data controllers).

**Data subject** - an individual who is the subject of personal data.
**Data controller** - determines the purposes for which and the manner in which any personal data are, or are to be, processed.
**Data processor** - processes the data on behalf of the data controller.

**GDPR Main Changes** 
- Increased territorial scope 
- Penalties: Fined up to 4% of annual global turnover or €20 Million 
- Consent: Given in an intelligible and easily accessible form, with the purpose for data processing attached to that consent 
- Data subject rights

##### Sensitive Personal Data
- racial or ethnic origin of the data subject;
- political opinions;
- religious beliefs or other beliefs of a similar nature
- membership of a trade union
- physical or mental health or condition
- sexual life
- commission or alleged commission of any offence; or
- any proceedings for any offence committed or alleged to have been committed, the disposal of such proceedings or the sentence of any court in such proceedings.