#### The Client
- Clients are experts in their domain
- don't know how computers work
- don't know what is possible or realistic

#### The Provider
- Knows how to build software
- Little to none domain knowledge (there are exceptions!)

#### User Stories
- Formal specifications are too hard. Get the customer involved
- Not requirements, but stories
- `As a` *user* `I want` *something* `so that` *benefit*
- Fixed story format: user and benefit

 > **As a** student, **I want** to purchase a parking pass **so that** I can drive to school.
 

#### Critical Aspects
- Card - representing requirement
- Conversation - exchange of ideas with customer
- Confirmation - customer-defined acceptance test

Who is the customer? 
- Product Owner in SCRUM 
- Actual system customer in XP

- What is the definition of “done” for this story?
- What steps need to be taken, and who is responsible for each of them?
- How long will it take to complete?
- Can this story be broken up into several stories?

User stories are “scored” based on their complexity or duration.

An epic is a chunk of work that contains multiple stories. 


#### A Conversation 
- User stories don't have all the information, A conversation may be needed
- Happens during Sprint Planning Meeting
- Address questions like “what”, “why”, “when”, “who”


### Use Cases
User Stories:
- Short (ideally one sentence) 
- From the user’s perspective
- No technical detail

Use cases: 
- Longer (more detail) 
- User interaction/flow
- System requirements and technical detail

### Actors
- user, database system, server, cloud platform
- A primary actor initiates an interaction with the system.
- System initiates interactions with secondary actors

> • The user is the primary actor. They initiated the interaction with the application 
> 
> • The database system is the secondary actor. The application initiates the interaction by sending the query


### Scenarios
A scenario is a description of how actors interact in a system. Contains A use case, An acceptance test case

- What tasks need to be performed? And by/for what actors?
- What data/resources do the actors need?
- What external events might affect the system?


