### History of Testing

| Period | Method |
| ------ | ------- |
| 1940s to 1956 | Program checkout involves debugging or testing Interpretive checking routines and post-mortem dumps |
| 1957 to 1978| Last step in the Waterfall methodology Can we exhaustively cover all cases? |
| 1979 to 1980s | Testers focus on finding bugs through tests |
| 1980s to now |  Testing as measurable part of development process |


### Kinds of Errors
| Name | Description | Example | 
| - | - | - |
| Mistake | following a bad plan | This algorithm isn’t actually going to sort a list |
| Failure | error in translation from plan to reality | The algorithm is correct but, I implemented it incorrectly. |
| Slip | mechanical error when writing code | Syntax error or off-by-one error in array access. |
| Malfunction | hardware failure or error in dependencies | Wrong data received in network communication. |


- **Static Error** - when developing the software
- **Immediate runtime error** - right when it occurs
- **Latent runtime error** - sometime after it occurs

- **Input Errors** - Operation cannot be completed because the inputs are wrong
- **Output Errors** - There is no way of producing a valid result.


### Indicating errors
- Error code – return null or -1
- Exception – use language mechanism to throw exception
- Option type – wrap result in an Option or Maybe type

### Handling Bad Input
- ignore bad input - assume the input is valid
- to recover from bad input - do the best we can with the bad input
- fail on bad input - give up on bad input


### Methods

#### Prove Programs Correct

- Testing can only prove presence of bugs, not their absence
- Most common approach: use types to specify correct behaviour
- More precise types to capture properties like non-nullability.
- Verification tools for critical software

#### Kill Yourself Strategy
- When the process does not know how to react, it should shut itself down
- let someone else deal with it.
- Error handling used in Erlang
	- Program consists of many small processes.
	- Processes communicate via messages.
	- Supervisor processes handle failures.


#### Test-Driven Development
- Write tests first - e you create test cases before writing actual code.
- Tests as a light-weight specification
- Test that we get correct results for sample inputs
- Test expected behaviour for bad inputs
- Test early, test often

### Kinds of Testing

**Manual Testing**
Human testers manually work through different features of the software trying to identify bugs, evaluate usability, etc.

**Automated Testing**
Test scripts, frameworks, etc., automate the testing of software, and programmers use these systems to develop a suite of tests that can be run regularly.

**Non-functional Testing**
Tests how well software works by evaluating performance, accessibility, user interface design, etc.

**Functional Testing**
Testing the “functionality” of software, ensuring it works properly and exhibits the right behaviour.

**Unit Tests**
- Individual units of source code (modules, functions, classes, methods, etc) are tested individually
- Unit test provides a kind of contract that a piece of code must satisfy
- Isolate each part of the program, try to determine if individual parts are correct 
- Often involves creating fake/mock objects

**Integration Tests**
- Individual software units are combined and tested as a group
- Takes modules that have been unit tested, groups them into larger aggregates, and applies tests defined in an integration test plan
- Detect inconsistencies or conflicts between units when integrated/aggregated into a group
- Often involves creating and populating objects, connecting to resources, etc.

**Systems Tests**
- Testing conducted on a complete integrated system, end-to-end
- Include external dependencies
- Often done by testing engineers

**Acceptance Tests**
Tests conducted to determine if the system satisfies some acceptance criteria.
*e.g. beta testing*

**Property-based Testing**
- Related to unit testing and integration testing
- Instead of specific examples, generate lots of random input parameter combinations that satisfy predefined properties
- *Potentially* more thorough than ordinary example-based unit tests


[[7. Continuous Integration]]