**Goal:** Deliver what the customer wants
- Understand what the customer wants
- Plan and estimate the work that needs to be done
- Verify the quality of the resulting product

**Common Problems**
- Over budget
- Delivered late
- Does not deliver what the customer really wants

**Project properties**
- Requirements
- End product
- Budget
- Timeline
- Size (complexity, lines of code)
- Domain (type and industry)

### Planning Phases

#### 1. Project goals and critical success factors
- What is the overall aim or purpose of the project?
- What goals or objectives do we need to support that aim?
- What features and functionality do we need to have to meet those objectives?


#### 2. Scope and assumptions
- What is included in the project?
- What is not included in the project?
- What assumptions are you making?
	- Staffing
	- Third-party suppliers
	- Technical issues
	-  Implicit feature

#### 3. Tasks and targets
- Decide Deliverables and Tasks
- Should follow trivially from project goals and critical success factors
- Each critical success factor is usually a milestone, but not limited to

##### Milestones
- Must be dated
- What they depend on, and what depends on them must be clearly documented
- Are they internal or external to the project?

#### 4. Roles and responsibilities
- Team development and training
- Understand different people will play different roles
- Make this a strength, not a weakness

##### Project Manager
- Develop project plan
- Recruit and manage project team
- Choose project management methodology
- Manage deliverables
- Assign tasks to team
- Provide updates to customer

##### Lead Developer
- Manage specific project plan activities and contributes to project plan development (with project manager)
- Coordinate documentation, testing, and training efforts related to project plan
- Act as Scrum Master (if Agile adopted)

##### Analyst
- Assist in defining the project
- Gather and document requirements
- Verify that project deliverables meet the requirements
- Participate in testing

#### 5. Quality plan
- How will you assure the quality of your project?
- Effort in the planning phase could save a lot of effort later.
- Quality requirements and defining measures of success

#### 6. Documentation
##### During the project
- Customer correspondence
- Internal communication
- Agreed specification for the work
- Issue log
- Activity log
##### Finishing the project
- Technical documentation
- User documentation

#### 7. Project control and reporting
The project plan should provide information on how the project will be monitored, including
- Regular progress reports to the customer
- Procedures for internal monitoring: 
	- Time spent
	- costs incurred
	- issues
	- problems
	
#### 8. Stakeholder analysis
An individual or group who can have an impact on or who will be affected by the project

For each stakeholder, record:
- Who they are
- Their potential impact on the project
- What is expected from them: Their responsibility Perceived attitudes and risks
- A management strategy involving all stakeholders

#### 9. Risk analysis
- Condition (What?)
- Cause (How?)
- Consequence
- Likelihood (Low/High)
- Impact (Small/Large) - cost, time, quality
- Timescale (Quick/long term)
- Who is responsible for monitoring? (Early warning signs)
- What can be done to reduce risk occurrence?
- What can be done when it does happen?

### Estimating Time
- Units of time must be relative to the task
- Underestimation: large tasks take lots of small time units
- Overestimation: small tasks do not always take a large unit of time

### Estimating Cost
- Hardware (Mostly Cheap)
- Travel
- Training
- Software

